all eyes are on the international
criminal court it's investigating
Israel's actions in Gaza and the West
Bank and Israeli officials fear it's
preparing to issue arrest warrant
against a prime minister and other
senior figures so what would legal
action mean for the country and its
leaders this is Inside Story
hello there and welcome to the program
I'm Nick Clark so Israel's prime
minister says nobody will stop its
military actions not even the
international criminal court the ICC is
investigating the country's operations
in Gaza in the occupied West Bank and
could issue warrants for the arrest of
Benjamin Netanyahu and other Israeli
leaders he says such a move would be
outrageous and set a dangerous precedent
and the foreign minister insists the
country will not be deterred and will
continue to fight the Court's prosecutor
says anybody who breaks the law will be
held accountable but Israel is not part
of the ICC and does not recognize its
jurisdiction yet any warrant IT issues
could put its officials at risk of being
arrested in other countries so what does
this mean for Netanyahu and his country
we'll put that to our guest shortly but
first this report from imag
Kimber Israeli officials fear the
international criminal court May issue
arrest warrants for senior members of
government and prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu may be on the list charges
could be over alleged war crimes
committed during Israel's ongoing war on
Gaza emergency meetings have reportedly
been held by the prime minister's office
under my leadership Israel will never
accept any attempt by the ICC to
undermine its inherent rights of
self-defense while the ICC will not
affect Israel's actions it would set a d
dangerous precedent that threatens the
soldiers and officials of all
democracies fighting Savage terrorism
and wanton aggression the ICC is the
only permanent International court that
can prosecute individuals for crimes
against humanity including genocide
Palestine was admitted in 2015 but
Israel is not a member and does not
recognize its
jurisdiction however many Israelis are
looking to the court in the ha for
justice over the Israelis who were taken
captive on October the 7th by Hamas
perpetrators should be held criminally
accountable for the atrocity they
committed we trust that the I has the
capacity to bring about Justice for the
hostages and their
families the visit of the prose
prosecutor to Israel has reinforced our
belief in the integrity and
professionalism of the Court
international criminal court prosecutor
Kareem k
says the attacks on October 7th come
under the Court's Jurisdiction and are
part of his investigation into crimes
allegedly committed in Gaza reality laws
of war must be respected they can't be
rendered Hollow they can't be
interpreted so as to Avid them of
meaning or to um dilute or eviscerate
any protective purpose that the Geneva
conventions and the law provides the
most vulnerable children uh women uh
people that are sick uh or civilians
they must be interpreted with full
protection the prosecutor has expressed
deep concern over Israeli incursions and
its bombing of Rafa where around 1.5
million people are Sheltering possible
charges could include acts regarded as
collective punishment including the
deliberate starvation of Palestinians in
Gaza and the withholding of Aid Israel
has faced numerous accusations of crimes
against humanity by International
lawyers and un Representatives
the state is also facing a case of
genocide in the international court of
justice brought by South Africa for
Netanyahu an arrest warrant may not be
of immediate concern but it could impact
his position internationally there's
only one thing better Imaging Kimber Al
jaer for Inside
Story So then plenty to take on let's
bring in our panel of guests from Tel
Aviv Gideon Levy is a columnist with
heret newspaper in anbury in the United
Kingdom Jeffrey nice is a barister and a
human rights lawyer and in gothenberg
Steven zunes is a professor of politics
at the University of San Francisco jents
a very warm welcome to all of you uh the
IC by its own definition investigates
where warranted and tries in individuals
charged with the gravest crimes of
concern to the International Community
you know the workings of the ICC very
well Jeffrey nice uh we might well
expect then that the ICC would be
looking into potential crimes from both
Israel and Hamas given everything that
has gone on since October the
7th absolutely it should look at it and
I'm glad it has um it's heartening to
know from what Mr khah has said that all
that although the crimes of October the
7th were committed on is the soil of the
state of Israel he satisfied he's got
jurisdiction there and it's well known
that he has jurisdiction for any crimes
committed
on Gaza or indeed on the West Bank
because of the acceptance of
jurisdiction by the court following uh
uh statement by the Palestinian
Authority in
1995 so from the very beginning both
sides of this conflict could have been
and I'm glad to say are being
investigated by as your piece says the
only established International
Court uh you mentioned there Jeffrey Kim
Khan the chief prosecutor of the
international criminal court uh one more
thing Jeffrey the the fact that Israel
is not a signatory to the IC what
difference does that make how does that
affect
things well it doesn't in these
circumstances because if Mr KH is
satisfied not only that he has
jurisdiction over crimes committed on
Gaza territory and he satisfied that
crimes committed on territory of Israel
possibly because they were initiated
undoubtedly in the territory of Gaza
then it makes no difference that Israel
is not a member of the international
criminal court it can't avoid the
exercise of jurisdiction by Mr KH and
his team of prosecutors and we'll have
to wait and see what the outcome of
those investigations are all right so
what's the picture in Tel Aviv let's
speak to Gideon leevy he's uh there now
and knows the sense the pulse of what's
happening the fact that Benjamin
Netanyahu has come out and spoken about
this Gideon what does that say and what
does it demonstrate is he
worried is worried and I must be frank
with you there are moments in which I'm
hopeful net is very worried and not only
netan this was the moment that the whole
the Israeli Elite which is involved in
the occupation in the war in Gaza was
afraido because finally everyone cares
about himself before anything else
unfortunately so and it might make their
lives quite complicated when they will
not be able to travel and even the
effect that you are wanted makes the
whole the whole game a new game it's not
anymore the condemnations of the EU or
the resolutions of
the UN General Assembly how it's about
decl declaring Israel as a as a place
where international law crimes are being
committed and criminals are being wanted
this is going to change the whole game
when you say uh there are members of the
administration not only Benjamin
Netanyahu who are you talking about and
tell us let's Explore More why they
would be so afraid as you put
it look it accompanies us for many years
now there were even moments in
which few cases in which a minister
didn't get off the airplane in London
and other General cancelled his visit
somewhere in Europe because there were
some kind of
because it might happens in a surprise
way you you are not necessarily
expecting it when you land in a European
country and all of a sudden you find
yourself in jail I don't see it
happening so so quickly but even this
atmosphere of feeling guilty and
wanted is very productive I want to say
Nick one more sentence it's very clear
to me at least that in the war of Gaza
many crimes were committed it's it's
very clear to me at least that nobody in
is is going to investigate those crimes
and for sure know to bring to Justice
those who are responsible and
accountable on those crimes this live
the situation in an
impossible way in which nobody will be
taken accountable unless some kind of
international institutions will get into
the picture and therefore I said before
quite in a in a embarrassed way that I
am also hopeful because I think that
those who are accountable for those
crimes should be brought to Justice okay
Steven zunes let's get the perspective
from the United States when some would
say across the world that the ICC
indictments would give if they come
would give another blow to Israel's
already battered moral standing but that
of course uh depends on perception and
it's a completely different View point
for example within the US Administration
isn't
it very much so and the United States
has been pretty hostile towards the
international criminal court from the
very beginning uh not only is the United
States one of the few Western countries
that are not members of the court but uh
US law forbids the United States from
cooperating with the court in any way in
fact it goes as far as saying that that
they president is authorized to use
whatever means necessary which implies
military force if uh any uh if the
United States or anybody any any
American or any um member of an Allied
country is held by or on behalf of the
ICC thus it was nicknamed the hay
Invasion act got a very negative
response from the Dutch as you might
imagine but uh what what what we're
going to see from the United States if
indeed there is an indictment against
Netanyahu is that it'll immediately be
attacked as biased as as hypocritical as
a double standard which is ironic
because you there have been a number of
foreign heads of state that have been
indicted and they've been almost all
black Africans and the other Only
Exception actually is Vladimir Putin uh
if if Netanyahu was indicted he would be
the first pro-western leader to ever get
an indictment and yet you can you better
believe that the United States will
insist that the court is somehow biased
just as they've said when the
international court of justice or other
uh International bodies have uh called
out Israel for violations of
international
law Jeffrey Gideon mentioned uh the fact
that he didn't think it would happen
anytime soon how long could this process
take I mean how soon could it happen is
what I
mean it's hard to know I imagine that
the icc's prosecutor has been
investigating this with some energy from
as soon as it became possible that
Israel's response to the terrible attack
of the October the 7th was
excessive and uh so that gives him about
four or five months I suppose to have
been doing the work that he clearly has
been doing and there's no reason to
believe that his arrest warrant if one
is issued it's only rumor at the moment
will be other than on
satisfactory grounds the fighting's got
to stop at some stage and at that stage
providing there is no pressure applied
to the
IC to withdraw the arrest warrant then
either a change of government in Israel
May surrender people such as Netanyahu
for trial the international criminal
court which is what happened in the case
of sladan mosovich who was a non-african
head of state who was pred or maybe in
later time he'll find himself in a
foreign country where he thinks he's
safe and he isn't he's handed over same
applies to to all and any other senior
members of his political cabinet or
military chain of command who may or who
may be the subject of arrest warrant so
it could happen comparatively quickly or
it could be in limbo for a very long
time indeed remember just to clarify
that Jeffrey sorry to jump in there but
just to clarify that so so it could
happen relatively quickly but within the
confines of the war itself while the war
is still going
on I would thought that was impossible
wasn't it because Mr Netanyahu as long
as he's prime minister is not going to
make himself available to be arrested by
anyone
anywhere uh Gideon Levy the perception
within Israel uh will differ wildly
given the the polarized view of of uh
the prime minister there just give us
some idea of of how it would be because
after all this would put Benjamin
Netanyahu in the same category as
foreign leaders like Omar Al Basher the
deposed president of Sudan and indeed
the Russian President Vladimir
Putin first of I would like to claim
here that focusing only on nanyu who is
all my lack of respect to netan putting
all the focus on netan is really unfair
because what we see now is an outcome of
years of a very clear policy of
apartheid and occupation netan didn't
start it net didn't invent it including
the incursions into Gaza and to put
everything on netan is very comfortable
and then to claim that after we will get
rid to from netan Israel will turn into
the paradise that we always dream that
it will be is really a little bit
oversimplified it's not about netan
including ignore this war because this
war is accepted by the majority of
Israeli public opinion this war was
approved by the entire government and
most of the members of the parliament
are supporting this war and supporting
continuing this war it's not like one
dictator here took his whole state into
a war and now he is responsible there
are many more others who should take
share in respons responsibility and
accountabil
among them obviously ministers and also
the heads of the army you can't think
that they are not involved in in those
crime now Israel will as usual put its
it its protection wall and claim that
the IC is anti-Semitic like the entire
world is anti-Semitic Israel will claim
that those are double standards Israel
will claim that the whole world hates us
and no no one almost no one in Israel
will ask just a moment how did we get to
it is it really only the world's fault
is there no fault done by Israel are we
really so innocent did we really conduct
this war in Gaza according to the
international law those questions will
not be asked
here let's take it on to the uh or at
least back to Vladimir Putin and Russia
uh if we could uh Steven zunes because
you do wonder what difference this would
make given what happened to him the
icc's pre-trial chamber issued a warrant
for the arrest of Vladimir Putin on
March the 17th 2023 yet it's made
absolutely no difference he's carried on
his war in Ukraine with impunity so what
difference is it likely to make in this
case Israel is much more dependent on
outside trade and military aid and the
like than Russia is
Russia obviously is is a huge country
both in size and population and Israel
despite its military might and
technological sophistication is still
quite small and indeed quite quite
dependent and uh it would make it very
difficult for uh Netanyahu and other
Israelis who are indicted from traveling
abroad the United States might be just
about the only country where they could
travel to to safely safe safely
and um and also I think it could
increase the um possibility that there
can be some sanctions or some
limitations other pressure from Western
countries again the United States
unfortunately would probably resist this
kind of thing but it would Empower I
think human rights activists and and
their supporters including trade unions
and popular movements for the
International Community to put greater
pressure on Israel and so while I don't
think Netanyahu is any more likely to
actually see Justice actually go to go
to prison than than Putin I think the
political impact could indeed be quite
more
significant but is Israel the Israeli
government has shown itself to be a
master of ignoring International
sanctions
even yeah very much so uh but the
trouble is the sanctions have not been
that strong uh the United States
obviously has blocked the United Nations
from taking any action and while some
European countries have been reluctant
to to provide certain kinds of military
Technologies um the trade is is is
continued and and uh you know that
Israel is seen very much as as as a part
of Europe in certain ways and uh with
with an indictment like this I think it
would be uh you know far more
controversial at least and I think
certainly there's some uh some sanctions
could be could be there that the
Israelis could actually feel for the
first time now again whether this will
actually alter policy as long as it have
this Lifeline from the United States
that is another question but uh
certainly they they will feel it there
will be some
impact and Gideon Benjamin Netanyahu
said came out and said that this would
not affect Israel's actions moving
forward but do you think it might have
implications on the way that Israel
behaves immediately in the war on God no
not for the short run because nany's
Main purpose is now to achieve this
unachievable goal of Smashing Hamas and
his other goal is to remain in power no
matter what the IC is deciding and for
this he has to continue and I'm afraid
he will continue he knows also that even
if he stops now the war the IC is in it
I mean the crimes were committed and
some someone will have to be taken
accountable for those crimes I mean we
we faced enough catastrophes in Gaza in
the last seven months stopping them now
is too little and too late but I don't
think that this will stop Israel and Nan
to get into Rafa unfortunately so you
think that will still proceed
now I'm afraid so unless the Americans
will be very clear about it which they
don't seem to be
Jeffrey there is a suggestion that that
this uh ICC investigation will be
attached or has been attached to the
current ICC investigations underway in
into potential crimes which date back to
2014 to 13th of June 2014 tell us about
that if you would and just how that
would work just attaching the two
together attaching them is possible I
suppose if a
continuing intention on the part of
Israel that could be said to be criminal
is
established but there's a very another
really important part about operation
protective edge of
2014 and what happened subsequent to it
in
2014 ishma Han certainly accepted that
it would be a good thing if the IC went
in and the following year the ICC got
jurisdiction that's
2015 so we have to look at the eight
years over which it might be argued that
the IC had dragged its feet concerning
the unhappy and tragic events of 2014
much smaller than they may have been in
the present crisis
consequences and you have to ask well
supposing in fact the ICC had shown
itself to be busy in those eight years
nine years and shown itself to be
willing to take on the Israeli
leadership and not to be intimidated by
the United States which may well over
those years have been deterring it from
taking
action you might ask if the present
thing could have happened at all the
present conflict would have happened at
all because leaders on both sides Hamas
and Israel would have known that there
was a legal
system in in waiting
and ready to deal with them even if it
hadn't actually finally got round to
issuing arrest warrants about protect
about uh events since October so
protective Edge and everything that
happened since then in the legal setting
May indeed be something that provides a
continuity of intention on the part of
Israel remember that protective Edge was
described by some as part of an Israel
state of Israel
a policy of mowing the grass which was a
way of perhaps keeping Gaza under
control if there's a continuing
intention shown between the two then
it's entirely possible that the
prosecutor will be looking at the crimes
as connected much great though the
present ones me than those H that
happened in 2014 extremely serious
indeed though they were 500 children
cult I think all right thanks for that
Jeffrey Stephen so we have these ICC
investigations going on then of course
there is South Africa's genocide case at
the international court of justice how
do these two separate investigations
square up and then I guess they can run
concurrently
right very much so I mean one looks at
um the specifics of the ongoing War
whether that does constitute a violation
of the international genocide treaty
the and whether Israel indeed is is
guilty of such violations there's a a
simultaneous case actually about around
the legality of the
um 50 7ye Israeli occupation of the West
Bank and and other territories seized in
the June 1967 war the international
court of justice which has been around
for for many many decades uh is is is
about countries about individual
countries and their violations to
international law they are brought forth
you know by the other other member
nations of the world Court the
international criminal court which is
founded only recently in
1999 uh looks at crimes of individuals
so it's more on the on the level the the
international court of justice looks at
Israel on a state level and their
violations whereas the ICC looks at on
the individual level of individual
leaders who are responsible for specific
war crimes Gideon how do you think this
latest approbation is likely to affect
the world view you know we touched on
the United States earlier where student
protest as elsewhere in the world indeed
are widespread there growing
condemnation all over the globe of the
way Israel is acting does that this just
adds to that does it it makes the whole
concept what Israel's doing uh in Gaza
to many
toxic no doubt that the last seven
months were crucial in the way that they
Chang the attitude of the world toward
Israel and this time also the Western
World and this time also the United
States and this time even some of the
Jewish communities in the world Israel
is in big troubles we have to face it we
have to admit it Israel deserves it in
my view but that's another question but
the it all it's all connected it's not a
coincident this war in Gaza which was
much worse than all the wars that Israel
had launched before with so many more
civilians being killed children women
starvation
destruction you name it and and you know
all of you know exactly what I mean this
war is a game changer and after this war
Israel cannot be perceived anymore as it
was before the thing is that the
Israelis are not exposed to the images
of Gaza because no one is showing it to
them but the world sees Gaza and anyone
who sees Gaza cannot remain indifferent
cannot say oh but it's Syria they killed
more anyone who sees Gaza has very very
hard question to ask and big big
suspicions about the one those who are
accountable for this and therefore it's
not a coincidence each of those powers
are trying now to bring people who are
responsible for the reality in Gaza to
be taken accountable and that's exactly
the role of the International
Community gentlemen our time is done we
appreciate your contributions thank you
very much thanks to all our guests
Gideon Livy Jeffrey nyson Steven zunes
thanks very much and thank you too for
watching you can see the program again
at any time just by visiting our website
alo.com and for further discussion just
go to our Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ inside story of course
you can also join the conversation on X
our handle is at AJ insid story from me
n Clark and the whole team here it's
goodbye for now
[Music]